today's question given are two circles
touching each other with radius 9 cm and
4 cm we are drawing a direct common
tangent touching the circles at Point a
and point B question is to find the
length of this common tangent or AB so
instead of solving for 9 and 4 cm we'll
solve it for radius capital r and small
R and we'll drive our formula and then
we'll put the values in
it to to solve it we'll start with some
construction we know that the Circle
Center the point of contact they all are
in same line so let's join o and o dash
now this length will be R and this
length is small R now AB is a tangent so
let's draw O A so this is capital r and
let's draw o
dasb now we know that radius is
perpendicular to tangent so this is 90°
angle here and this is 90° now if you'll
see for o a and o Das B these two angles
are Co interior whose sum is
180° so o a and o Das B are parallel to
each
other now we are drawing one more
construction that is we are drawing line
parallel to o o Das from B so we are
drawing BM parallel to o o
dash now these two lines are also
parallel so this figure which is forming
here opposite sides are parallel
so it's a parallelogram so if B O Das is
R small R then this o m will be small R
and A M will become your capital r minus
small R now o o dash that's capital r+
small R so MB will be same that is r +
r now look at the triangle a m b it's a
right angle triangle at A and M m b is
hypotenuse so applying Pythagoras
Theorem now putting the value of ab we
have to find am is Rus R and BM is r + r
so solving it by opening the brackets
now both the side R square and R square
will get cancelled small R square and
small R square will get cancelled so
we'll get AB square is 4 * of RR or AB
the length of direct common tangent
that's 2 * of root capital r into small
R this formula is very helpful and we'll
be using in lot of question in future
videos ended formula for the same so if
the circles they are not touching each
other but they are separated by a
distance of capital D from each other so
instead of r + r we'll have in the same
formula we'll have D here so again
taking the same triangle A and B
applying pyth theorem so instead of
putting your BM as r+ R we will just put
D here and solving it we'll get AB as
Square < TK of d s - r - r² so this
formula is for direct common tangent if
circles are separated from each other
and if they are touching each other then
this capital D will become r + r and the
formula will reduce to AB is 2 * of root
r
r let's come back to our original
question so here the formula we'll be
using AB is 2 * of root RR and we'll put
capital r as 9 cm small r as 4 cm so
length of common tangent is coming as 12
CM I hope you enjoyed the solution and
I'll see you in next video till then T
[Music]
bye-bye
w